❯ Whould it be disruptive to our line of development if we add the canny edge detector operation now?

Not disruptive — it fits the existing model without changing anything structural. Let me be specific about why, and about the one place it does push.

It decomposes into what we already have

Canny is five stages, and each maps to a single-input-or-multi-input, single-output operation:

B  = gaussian(A, sigma=1.4)
Gx = sobel(B, axis=x)
Gy = sobel(B, axis=y)
M  = sobel(B, axis=mag)
N  = nms(M, Gx, Gy)              ← new kernel
E  = hysteresis(N, low=0.05, high=0.15)   ← new kernel

Two new kernels, two registry entries. No new dtype, no change to the session, the parser, the log, or the display path. hysteresis outputs an i32 mask, which already has a categorical default view.

What it does exercise for the first time

Worth knowing, because these are things we designed for and have never actually used:

- A multi-input native kernel. nms takes three. The C table declares an input count and runKernel validates it, but every kernel so far takes 0 or 1. The plumbing exists and is untested.
- Dynamic allocation inside a kernel. Hysteresis needs a stack for the flood fill. First kernel to allocate scratch beyond a fixed temp buffer.
- Cancellation actually mattering. Hysteresis is the first kernel with data-dependent iteration rather than a fixed pixel loop. The flag has been threaded through every kernel from the start and never had a reason to be polled mid-work.

Also convenient: hysteresis is order-independent — a pixel is either connected to a strong edge or it isn't — so it's deterministic by construction, no summation-order concern.

The one real design question

Whether to also add a convenience canny(src, sigma, low, high) that runs the whole chain in one kernel.

I'd say no, not initially. The explicit chain is the point of a lab: you can look at N and see what non-maximum suppression actually did, change low and re-run only the last stage, and the provenance log shows five entries explaining the result instead of one opaque one. A monolithic canny is the thing you add once you're tired of typing it, and it costs you the ability to inspect the middle.

The cost of explicit staging is that three sobel calls recompute the same convolution three times. At lab scale that's milliseconds and worth it.

Want me to build it? I'd do nms first with tests against known cases — a diagonal edge, a ridge that should thin to one pixel — then hysteresis.

✻ Cooked for 42s

❯ Yes, build it.

Building nms first. I need a new status code for parameter errors, then the two kernels:

  Ran 2 shell commands

All correct by hand. Now proper tests:

  Ran 2 shell commands

896 — and that's not a failure, it's the exactly correct answer. My 20% ceiling was an arbitrary guess. Let me look at the structure before fixing the assertion:

  Ran 1 shell command

The output is textbook-correct, and my assertion was the wrong shape. Row 4 — inside a block vertically, so it crosses only vertical boundaries — has exactly 7 lit pixels, one per internal boundary, each a single pixel wide. Replacing the percentage guess with the geometry:

  Ran 2 shell commands

Canny works, and it wasn't disruptive — two kernels, two registry entries, nothing structural changed.

A  = pattern(kind=checker, width=256, height=256)
B  = gaussian(A, sigma=1.4)
Gx = sobel(B, axis=x)
Gy = sobel(B, axis=y)
M  = sobel(B, axis=mag)
N  = nms(M, Gx, Gy)
E  = hysteresis(N, low=0.01, high=0.04)

The provenance graph shows the DAG doing real work: consumers of B#1: [3, 4, 5] — one blurred image feeding three Sobel calls, and E reaching back through all seven entries.

The three firsts it exercised

All worked without changes, which is the point of having designed for them:

- A multi-input native kernel — nms takes three buffers. That path had never been used by anything but a test fixture.
- Dynamic allocation in a kernel — hysteresis grows its flood-fill stack by doubling rather than allocating worst-case, which would be 96 MB for a 12 MP image to hold a few hundred kilobytes of actual edges.
- Cancellation that matters — hysteresis is the first kernel whose work is data-dependent rather than a fixed pixel loop, so it polls mid-traversal. The flag has been in every kernel signature since the first one and finally had a reason to exist.

One test that taught me something

My Canny test asserted "fewer than 20% of pixels are edges." It failed at 896/4096 = 21.9%.

896 is exactly right: a 64×64 checkerboard of 8-pixel blocks has 7 internal vertical and 7 internal horizontal boundaries, and 7×64 + 7×64 = 896. My tolerance was a guess and the code was correct.

Replaced with assertions derived from the geometry: row 4 sits inside a block vertically, so it crosses only vertical boundaries — it must have exactly 7 lit pixels, no two adjacent (proving nms thinned to one pixel), each within one pixel of a block boundary. That's a real test of Canny; the percentage was a test of my guess.

Two deliberate details worth knowing: nms compares asymmetrically (> one way, >= the other) so a ridge exactly two pixels wide thins to one; and hysteresis does not reflect at borders, because reflection is right for convolution and wrong for connectivity — the last pixel of a row doesn't touch the first pixel of the next.

180 tests green. Commit?
